The town wouldn't be here if it hadn't been for the port.
If there hadn't been a port in Fishguard,
then there wouldn't be fishing here,
there wouldn't be boats here.
Because it's a sheltered spot to moor a boat,
that is why people come here.
That's why the boats here, that's why they're here.
It's been here for nearly a thousand years as a port.
It's a long time.
And if you look around the town,
lots of the people who had the houses built
were all to do with making boats,
building boats, mending boats, and so on, or trading.
People traded from here.
The main park in the middle of town is called Lotter Park.
Lotter Park was bought by a sea captain
who made his money from the phosphate trade
around Cape Horn in Chile.
He would go from here to Chile in wooden sailing ships.
I don't know if they did it, goodness knows,
but he did it and they used to bring back phosphates.
And that was used on the land here to improve the land.
And it was a big step forward in agriculture in this area.
The land became much more productive
because phosphates came in.
They used to collect what was called guano,
which is seabird droppings.
But in Chile, they got enormous amounts of them
and that's what they used to do.
So the park in the middle of town
is named after that trade.
So all these, the amenities of the town
came from the profits made by the trade.
So the trade, the harbor,
was absolutely essential to the town.